Overview and limitations
The focus of this module is so vast that regardless of how hard I could try, I would never do it justice or even scratch its surface – in fact, a number of universities offer courses, usually at the postgraduate level, devoted exclusively to this topic and still not cover it in its entirety. Indeed, I alone have been involved in numerous international studies in this field and have published multiple research papers in the area of mental health and faith.

Furthermore, the link between faith and wellbeing is being investigated not only by psychology but also by counselling, neuroscience, medicine, psychiatry and even philosophy and theology – interestingly, though unsurprisingly, all of these disciplines tend to utilise, at various degrees, the theories I have already discussed in this course.

From within the expanding field of the psychology of faith – that currently includes research outputs from all the above areas – there are already at least three academic handbooks on the matter, summarising the findings and theories so far: “Handbook of religion and health” (2012), “Religion and mental health” (2018), and “Handbook of spirituality, religion, and mental health” (2020).

As such, in this module I will only offer a general and arguably rather simplified overview of the field, point at certain foundational areas, and link external videos that will briefly cover specific foci of direct interest.

Batson’s taxonomic approach to faith
From within the psychology of faith, one of the psychological taxonomies used to assess the link between faith and wellbeing was developed by Batson. Thus, an introduction to his approach is of consequence here.

Emeritus Professor Daniel Batson is an American psychologist (University of Kansas), with a PhD in theology and psychology, who is considered by many the leader of the experimental method in the psychology of faith. One of his main research interests focusses in prosocial and empathic faith-related behaviours and by extension in their consequences to personal and interpersonal psychosocial wellbeing – his most famous and highly influential study is the Good Samaritan experiment.




Batson, in an attempt to conceptually validate Allport’s scales (discussed in Module 5 of this OLE), realised that those scales had neglected fundamental aspects of Allport’s theory (see Batson, 1976). Allport constantly referred to the individual’s religious development as a quest – this readiness to doubt and self-criticism that leads to the mature form of religiousness. As Allport himself puts it in his book, we discussed previously: “the mature religious sentiment is ordinarily fashioned in the workshop of doubt” (p. 83). However, Batson noticed that nowhere in Allport’s scales was this idea of doubt communicated.

With that in mind, he proposed a new empirical arrangement of Allport’s theoretical constructs. Initially, he preserved extrinsic orientation, although he renamed it external or means to stretch its use by the believer towards self-serving goals. However, subsequent empirical evidence made him realise that his external dimension was not measuring extrinsic religiousness, but rather an aspect of intrinsic religion, that of the social influences on the development of a mature religion. Furthermore, he broke down the intrinsic orientation into two largely independent sub-constructs (Batson et al., 1993):

One he called internal or ends orientation (similar to the core elements of the intrinsic one), which refers to “the degree to which an individual’s religion is a result of internal needs for certainty, strength, and direction” (p. 169),
and another he termed the quest dimension to address those theoretical issues above that Allport had arguably failed to incorporate in his measurement.
Batson defines the quest orientation as “the degree to which an individual’s religion involves an open-ended, responsive dialogue with existential questions raised by the contradictions and tragedies of life” (p. 169). He claims that individuals who are high on the quest dimension, possess the ultimate, most mature form of faith, a form that can lead to “universal compassion” (Batson et al., 2001) and consequently to enhances states of wellbeing. Batson’s Religious Life Inventory is arguably one of the commonly used measurements of religious orientation.

As perhaps expected, Batson’s approach has been criticised, mainly by the advocates of the Allportian taxonomy. Consequently, the focus of the criticism has been on the quest dimension.

The first to clearly voice this concern was Professor Michael Donahue (Institute for the Psychological Sciences, Arlington, US), who has served as the secretary of the American Psychological Association's Division 36: Psychology of Religion and has been actively interested in the association between faith and wellbeing among adolescents. Already in 1985 in a still highly regarded publication in the field, he argued that although doubt was indeed an element of Allport’s religious sentiment, it was conceived as part of a transitional phase of faith development. Doubt will gradually fade and eventually it will lead to the mature form of religiosity, that is, the intrinsic orientation, or for that matter, the internal one. Therefore, the quest dimension should be seen as a stage of religious sentiment (not as religious maturity), through which an individual needs to pass in order to acquire a mature orientation. There is empirical evidence supporting this claim showing that in Christian samples the intrinsic orientation tends to increase with age, while quest tends to decrease. However, Batson in defense of his scale presented studies that have actually shown that mean scores in the quest orientation tend to be similar between young and old Christian adults (late teens to 60 year old), or in certain instances be even higher in the latter group.

At the same time if Donahue’s thesis is correct, one would expect quest and intrinsic to have a relatively strong inverse relationship. However, although the inverse nature of this association is shown in almost every published study that compares the two scales, the magnitude of this relationship has been very low to non-existent and possibly curvilinear in nature. In fact, quest tends not to have an important (linear at least) relationship with any of the rest of the religious orientation constructs discussed here. Although this is good news to Batson’s ears, as he takes it to suggest that quest is an independent component of religiosity, for others it is evidence that the quest orientation does not measure anything exclusive to faith, but a general tendency to questioning, sophomoric doubt, or even agnosticism. Naturally, Batson and his followers have addressed this criticism in a series of studies, through which they showed that although they could not exclude the possibility of the above claim, their evidence suggests a significant difference in the quest behaviour between not only religious and nonreligious people, but also, at least within Christians, between Charismatic and Mainstream denominations – with the former in both instances having higher levels of the construct.

Regardless of whether one follows the Allportian or Batson’s taxonomies, empirical evidence tends to suggest that mature or moderate religiosity enhances mental health, especially in areas such as anxiety and depression, whereas strong, maladaptive, immature religiosity can be very harmful to the individual and has been frequently associated with neurotic or psychotic disorders – you may connect these findings to the focus of the previous module. Curiously, however, although many studies show that extrinsic orientation tends to exhibit a positive association with various aspects of psychopathology and intrinsic tends to show a reverse but less reliable pattern, the evidence for the quest orientation tends to demonstrate a somewhat unclear relationship, with approximately an average of 50% or the studies showing no association. Interestingly, among the ones that do, many show that quest orientations can be detrimental to the individual’s wellbeing!

Here is a short video, in which Associate Professor Joseph Bulbulia (Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand) discusses some findings on religiosity, prosociality and wellbeing:



If you are further interested in the specific association between religiosity and political ideation/affiliation, I recommend reading the following book chapter by Professor Michael Ashton (Brock University, Canada), "Religion and Politics (2018). In, M. Ashton (Ed), Individual Differences & Personality (3rd ed., Chapter 12, pp. 303-326). Elsevier Inc".

Faith and the brain
Psychological wellbeing is directly, primarily, and intricately linked to brain activity and functions; unsurprisingly, so is faith. Neuroscience, clinical psychology and psychiatry have been attempting to identify and map the regions of the brain and their activity that relate to faith. As a consequence, sometime in the early 90s the academic field of Neurotheology emerged – not to be confused with the earlier or parallel pseudo-scientific fields with the same name.  Arguably one of the founders of this field is Andrew Newberg, MD, who is a Professor of religious studies and a neuroscientist at the School of Medicine in the University of Pennsylvania (US), with research interests in religiosity and psychiatric disorders. Additionally, he is the (co)author of the three main academic books in the field: “Neurotheology: Brain, science, spirituality, religious experiences” (2003), “Principles of Neurotheology” (2016), and “Neurotheology: How science can enlighten us about spirituality” (2020). Simply put, neurotheology, by primarily focussing on the brain, attempts to assess the neurological and evolutionary bases of functional and dysfunctional faith-related experiences and phenomena.

Here is a short clip in which Prof. Newberg describes this focus:



However, already in 1987, the late Professor Michael Persinger (Director of Consciousness Research Laboratory, Laurentian University, Ontario, Canada) published a rather provocative academic book titled “Neuropsychological Bases of God Beliefs”, in which he summarised the results of his studies and presented his neurophysiological theory of faith.

With the use of brain-scans, Persinger realised that faith experiences, both visual and auditory – while he later identified outputs involving all the senses, as well as additional cognitive expressions – tend to activate the same areas in the temporal lobes of the brain. By experimentally reversing the process, he found that the activation of these areas, through external transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), tended to produce subjective experiences of a profound mystical or parapsychological character. He went on to identify the natural ways through which such activation can occur. Indeed, he did find that lack of oxygen, yogic breathing, fasting, and various stresses and mental dysfunctions, like anxiety and intense emotional states, were more likely to activate these regions of the brain and thus produce religious experiences. He concluded that faith-related experiences can be explained as unconscious responses to conscious processes stimulated by neurophysiological factors. He later co-developed the God helmet, an apparatus that can apparently induce such mystical experiences.

In the following short clip, Dr Susan Blackmore (author of “The meme machine”) describes her experience with using the God helmet in Persinger’s laboratories:



Although, Persinger has published multiple studies on the above phenomenon, the reliability of his conclusions and research methods have been heavily criticised. One of his vocal critics has been Professor Pehr Granqvist (Stockholm University, Sweden), who, curiously, is one of the major contributors to the development and assessment of the attachment to God theory, I covered in the previous module. In a number of studies (Granqvist & Larsson, 2006; Granqvist et al., 2005), he and his team were unable to reliably replicate Persinger’s claims, while they identified other psychological factors as being more important in producing such mystical experiences, primarily the individual’s degree of religiosity and their levels of suggestibility, that is, the person’s disposition to accept and act on interpersonal suggestions – a key requirement for a successful treatment outcome of Clinical Hypnotherapy.

This and similar evidence does not necessarily refute Persinger’s observations, but rather indicate that the link between the brain and faith is far more complex than what the above claims suggest. In fact, in a series of more recent studies in the field of neurospirituality, Dr Michael Ferguson (Harvard Medical School, US) identified multiple brain regions that are linked to faith-related experiences.

Here is a recent TEDx talk of his, where he summarises his findings:



Diagnostic classification of faith-related problems
As I mentioned in a previous module, the 4th edition of the Diagnostic & Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) – one of the two official diagnostic manuals, the other being the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) published by WHO, used by medical doctors, psychiatrists and clinical psychologists around the world – introduced a unique diagnostic classification for religious and spiritual problems (diagnostic code; V62.89). This inclusion assumes the existence of mental problems that are directly, and perhaps exclusively, related to faith (this code is obviously still present in the current, 2022, 5th edition text revision of this manual). Such problems may relate to "loss or questioning of faith, problems associated with conversion to a new faith, or questioning of spiritual values that may not necessarily be related to an organized church or religious institution". The 11th edition of the ICD (2022) contains some finer diagnostic classifications, such as religious delusions (diagnostic code: MB26.08) or religious discrimination (diagnostic code: QE04).

There is some evidence suggesting the existence of an explicit association between institutional religious affiliation and psychological illnesses. In one such instance, MacDonald and Luckett (1983) mapped the psychiatric profiles of 7050 psychiatric Christian patients in the US, based on DSM-II diagnostic criteria. They found that neuroses were two of the most common illnesses present in Catholics and non-mainline Protestants; mainline Protestants tended to have personality disorders, while individuals from Christian sects did not tend to manifest any of these disorders, with psychoses being the more prevalent among them. These findings have been partially identified in other countries or settings (e.g. Cermer & Winer, 1990; Dalgalarrondo & Lotz, 1993), as well as contested elsewhere (e.g. Pfeifer, 1994; Sheldon, 2006; Vitorino et al., 2018).

Here is a short video of a segment of a lecture by Professor Roger Walsh, MD (Department of Psychiatry, University of California) that summarises some of these findings:



When it comes to spirituality, allow me to repeat what I wrote in the reading for Module 1 in this OLE, where I cited evidence suggesting that spirituality may promote good physical and mental health. However, additional research evidence also shows that people who are involved in spiritual activities, such as certain cults, are more likely to be delusional or even psychotic than individuals following mainstream institutional religions. Still, a number of studies (including some of my research) failed to find any meaningful or reliable association between psychological wellbeing and spirituality. Curiously, albeit unsurprisingly, individual's who believe that their wellbeing is absolutely and exclusively controlled by God or divine forces – a belief formally known as the God locus of control – tend to have bad health-related outcomes and recover very slowly from illness, simply because they tend to put very little or no effort in asking for medical or social help and support.  

Interestingly, as others and I have found, there is still a general reluctance among psychiatrists and clinical psychologists to incorporate their clients’ or patients’ faith inclinations into their treatment. I have discussed some potential reasons for that in Module 4.

In this short clip, Professor Thomas Gutheil (Harvard Medical School) discusses this issue:



Faith practices and wellbeing
Studies across countries, religions, ethnic backgrounds, age, and social status, suggest a positive relationship between faith practices, such as place of worship attendance or prayer, and mental health. These findings have been generally explained through the effects of social or psychological support, personal religious meaning, or effective coping mechanisms religious communities and practices can provide to their members. Additionally, it has been suggested (e.g. Ellison, 1991) that religious involvement may cause certain types of beliefs, which in turn promote mental health and wellbeing. Moreover, some evidence indicates that the above relationship could be curvilinear, with the healthiest people being the highly religious, as well as the highly nonreligious (atheists) ones! Finally, a rather recent meta-analytic study by Bonelli and Koenig (2013) reviewed the medical literature and concluded that “there is good evidence that religious involvement is correlated with better mental health in the areas of depression, substance abuse, and suicide; some evidence in stress-related disorders and dementia; insufficient evidence in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, and no data in many other mental disorders” (p. 657).

Although my intention is not to diminish in any sense the direction of these findings, I have identified potential empirical issues worth mentioning. Many, if not most, of these studies appear to be suffering from inadequate control of important confounding psychophysiological variables. I would like to point out two of them.

Social desirability. This psychological construct colloquially can be referred to as lying. Two of the most commonly identified components of social desirability are self-deception – a person’s belief that an otherwise false idea or feeling about themselves is true – and (self-)impression formation – a tendency to present oneself in interpersonally desirable ways. Thus, certain religious people may tend to believe or present themselves as healthier than they actually are – as Batson et al. (1993) and Eysenck (1998) have independently demonstrated.
The functional capacity covariate. This is a term introduced to the psychology of faith by Professor Richard Sloan (Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, US) in a paper published is the prestigious medical journal Lancet in 1999. The term refers to the individual’s physical or psychological ability to perform certain daily normal functions. Contextually, although studies suggest that, say, churchgoers are healthier than non-churchgoers, most have failed to acknowledge that religious people with poor physical or mental health are indeed far less likely to frequently attend places of worship and participate in communal religious practices. Consequently, such a cohort has been largely omitted from studies in this area, resulting in an unknown degree of bias in the empirical findings and conclusions.
Final thoughts
Summarising the general evidence so far, as I stated within a different context in a previous module, faith has been shown to promote wellbeing by, for example, (1) reducing existential anxiety, (2) providing a sense of control over life, (3) supplying a focussed identity, and (4) giving moral guidance. Conversely, faith may also upon occasion (1) nurture dependency, (2) increase prejudice, (3) promote high levels of anxiety and fear, and (4) generate unrealistic expectations about life.

However, as you probably have gathered by now, the connection between faith and wellbeing is a rather complex one. A myriad of psychological, biological, and social elements are intertwined in this association that make the task of holistically and definitively assessing it a rather challenging enterprise. In this nexus, a key question still lingers. Not whether faith has an effect on personal and interpersonal wellbeing – studies have quite clearly demonstrated this – but rather whether it has a unique effect. In other words, if we were to account for the effects of all the relevant variables in this equation, would faith still show an effect? If wellbeing variations can be explained sufficiently and significantly by the rest of the involved structures and processes, then the role of faith becomes insignificant and thus ignorable. With an unknown degree of uncertainty, I am tempted to suggest that faith does have a unique effect on wellbeing, closely followed with I do not know. This position is not frustrating but rather quite intriguing, as it motivates further research and theoretical dialogue in this fascinating area of the psychology of faith.